README.md, before:

# CHia Improvement Proposals (CHIPS)

This repository contains a list of improvements related to Chia. The complete procedure for proposing and managing a CHIP can be found in [CHIP 1](/CHIPs/chip-0001.md).

## Chip list
The rest of this document will contain a summary of all notable CHIPs, organized by status.

### Draft
* [chip-0002](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/blob/b4dad7c02949a807d96e7d86d7a09312a2c0c020/CHIPs/chip-0002.md) -- dApp protocol

* [chip-0003](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/blob/9baab1dc92e4819d016f27bab8311de1ce2acc77/CHIPs/chip-0003.md) -- minimum fee

### Review
* None

### Review (Fast Track)
* None

### Last Call
* None

### Final
* None

### Stagnant
* None

### Withdrawn
* None

### Obsolete
* None

### Living
* [chip-0001](/CHIPs/chip-0001.md) -- CHia Improvement Proposal (CHIP) process

### Grandfathered
The following standards were finalized before the CHIP process had been created:
* [Singletons](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/singletons) -- A standard for creating puzzles with unique IDs
* [Pooling](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/pooling) -- Chia's decentralized pooling protocol
* [CAT1](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/cats) -- The first standard for Chia Asset Tokens
* [Offers](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/offers) -- The first standard for peer-to-peer asset exchange on Chia's blockchain

-----

Take a look at notes/TODO.md to see chips that still need to be created.

To view these chips in pretty rendered markdown in your browser, type:

gem install bundler jekyll
jekyll serve

Commit message:

Adding CHIPs community calls details.  (#16)
* Update README.md

* Amend grammar/formatting

Co-authored-by: Will Riches <will@riches.im>

README.md, after:

# CHia Improvement Proposals (CHIPs)

This repository contains a list of improvements related to Chia. The complete procedure for proposing and managing a CHIP can be found in [CHIP 1](/CHIPs/chip-0001.md).

The [CHIPs backlog project](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/projects/1) provides the list of on-going proposals and their status. 

## Meetings
**Purpose:**

The CHIPs community meetings provide a forum for the community to gather and discuss CHIPs proposals and support each other in building a secure, sustainable, and compliant blockchain technology. 

**Agenda:**

The agenda of each meeting should focus on the CHIPs proposals, and it should include two main topics: 
- Author to present the CHIP
- Feedback and discussion

**Logistics**
- The meeting information will be tracked with GitHub [project](https://github.com/Chia-Network/dev-community-meetings/projects/1). 
- The agenda should be published two weeks before the actual meeting to give the community ample time to suggest agenda items or post questions about the CHIP. 


## CHIP list
The rest of this document is a summary of all notable CHIPs, organized by status.

### Living
* [chip-0001](/CHIPs/chip-0001.md) -- CHia Improvement Proposal (CHIP) process


### Draft
* [chip-0002](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/blob/b4dad7c02949a807d96e7d86d7a09312a2c0c020/CHIPs/chip-0002.md) -- dApp protocol

* [chip-0003](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/blob/9baab1dc92e4819d016f27bab8311de1ce2acc77/CHIPs/chip-0003.md) -- minimum fee

### Review
* None

### Review (Fast Track)
* None

### Last Call
* None

### Final
* None

### Stagnant
* None

### Withdrawn
* None

### Obsolete
* None


### Grandfathered
The following standards were finalized before the CHIP process had been created:
* [Singletons](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/singletons) -- A standard for creating puzzles with unique IDs
* [Pooling](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/pooling) -- Chia's decentralized pooling protocol
* [CAT1](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/cats) -- The first standard for Chia Asset Tokens
* [Offers](https://chialisp.com/docs/puzzles/offers) -- The first standard for peer-to-peer asset exchange on Chia's blockchain

-----

Take a look at [notes/TODO.md](/notes/TODO.md) to see CHIPs that still need to be created.

To view these CHIPs in pretty rendered Markdown in your browser, type:

```
gem install bundler jekyll
jekyll serve
```
