```
  BIP: 86
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: BIT86 Scripting
  Author: Bram Cohen <bram@chia.net>, James Prestwich <james@prestwi.ch>
  Comments-URI: #TODO
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2018-02-01
  License: PD
  Requiers: 173
```

# TODO
More discussion of advantages
Comments-uri
Bram Review
    more op_codes reclaimed?
    include CLTV+CSV semantics changes?
BIP8 parameters
Limitations on Jumps (don't fill scripts with arbitrary data)

# Abstract

This document proposes a new witness script version based on Script.

# Summary

Bit86 is an updated version of Script. It is intended to simplify script evaluation and enable future upgrades. To this end, Bit86 reclaims many disabled opcodes, replaces `OP_IF` and other flow control opcodes with new a new flow control system based on forward jumps, and introduces the concept of Abort-Succeed. It may be soft-forked in as a new witness script version.

# Motivation

Because unknown or reserved opcodes render a transaction invalid, Script has limited room for new opcodes. Upgrades must replace `OP_NOP4` through `OP_NOP10`. Some opcodes have been disabled (`OP_CAT`). Some are simply inadvisable (`OP_SHA1`). An improved version of Script can provide a simpler and more extensible compilation target for higher-level constructs like [Ivy](https://blog.chain.com/ivy-for-bitcoin-a-smart-contract-language-that-compiles-to-bitcoin-script-bec06377141a) or [BitML](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/122.pdf).

# Specification

If the witness program's version byte is 2, the witness program is treated as a Bit86 program. Generally Bit86 behaves identically to Script, with the following exceptions:

## Abort-Succeed

Reserved opcodes cause script execution to abort. Scripts aborted by execution of a reserved opcode are deemed to have been executed successfully. Because older nodes will abort-succeed, future soft forks may add any functionality to any reserved opcode.

In addition, `OP_RESERVED` is renamed to `OP_ABORTSUCCEED`. Whenver a new opcode is created, it overrides a specific reserved opcode. `OP_ABORTSUCCEED` may not be overwritten by new opcodes.

While Bit86 maintains the cleanstack rule, abort-succeed overrides it. When encountering an abort-succeed, the script execuction is deemed to be successful regardless of the state of the stack.

## Reclaimed opcodes

The following opcodes are converted to reserved (abort-succeed) opcodes.

1. All disabled opcodes (`OP_CAT`, `OP_SUBSTR`, `OP_LEFT` etc.)
2. `OP_SHA1`
3. `OP_CODESEPARATOR`
4. `OP_VERIF`, `OP_VERNOTIF`, `OP_RESERVED1`, `OP_RESERVED2`, `OP_VER`, `OP_VERIF`,
5. `OP_NOP4` through `OP_NOP10`
6. `OP_ENDIF`

## Jump-based flow control

`OP_IF` is replaced with `OP_IFJUMP`. `OP_IFJUMP` is always immediately followed by a varint dictating the number of bytes to jump forward. `OP_IFJUMP` pops the top stack item. If the popped item is true, script execution jumps forward the specified number of bytes.

`OP_NOTIF` is replaced with `OP_NOTIFJUMP`. `OP_NOTIFJUMP` is always immediately followed by a varint dictating the number of bytes to jump forward. `OP_NOTIFJUMP` pops the top stack item. If the popped item is false, script execution jumps forward the specified number of bytes.

`OP_ELSE` is replaced with `OP_JUMP`. `OP_JUMP` is always immediately followed by a varint dictating the number of bytes to jump forward. Script execution jumps forward the exact number of specified bytes. No more than 32 bytes may be jumped over in this way.

`OP_ENDIF` is converted to a reserved (abort-succeed) opcode.

```Script
OP_DUP
OP_HASH160
OP_IF
    pushdata(<pubkeyhash 0>)
OP_ELSE
    pushdata(<pubkeyhash 1>)
OP_ENDIF
OP_EQUALVERIFY
OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY
```

```Bit86
OP_DUP
OP_HASH160
OP_IFJUMP 0x16
    pushdata(<pubkeyhash 0>)
OP_JUMP 0x14
    pushdata(<pubkeyhash 1>)
OP_EQUALVERIFY
OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY
```
# Reference Implementation

A reference implementation is being developed in Python. A C++ implementation will follow.

# Compatibility

Pre-SegWit clients will not see or validate the witness program or data.

SegWit clients that do not support Bit86 will not validate the Bit86 witness program.

If new opcodes are added to Bit86, older Bit86 clients will abort-succeed when attempting to execute new opcodes.

# Deployment

This BIP will be deployed by BIP8 (Version bits with lock-in by height) with the name "bit86script" and using bit 4.

For Bitcoin mainnet, the BIP8 startheight will be at height M to be determined and BIP8 timeout activation will occur on height M + 50,400 blocks.

For Bitcoin testnet, the BIP8 startheight will be at height T to be determined and BIP8 timeout activation will occur on height T + 50,400 blocks.

# References

https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/script/script.h
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Script
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki

# Copyright

This document is placed in the public domain.
