---
layout: markdown
---

Unique digital signatures
    only one valid signature for message/pubkey pair

Unique & publicly verifiable proof of sequential work

Unique & signed proofs of space
    identity is a pubkey. proof cannot be generated by someone without privkey
    weak uniqueness -- expectation is 1 proof for any challenge.
    sometimes more or less, but expected is 1



## Trunk and foliage

Trunk is alternating PoS and VDFs

Block contains a PoS.
    Run a VDF on top of that to finalize the block
    Time it has to run is based on the hash of the PoS.
    Hardness parameter adjusts finalization time

The trunk is not grindable, because all values are unique

The foliage contains a signature with the corresponding secret key.
It signs the hash of the previous block and the proof of space and the set of txns.

Miners may come up with alternative foliage, because the header does not commit to the transactions.

Tradeoff: foliage can be rewritten. Trunk is near-canonical (can't be ground effectively).


## Spaceminer

1. Init by writing sectors
2. Every time a block shows up, try to mine on top of it.
3. Run the proving algorithm
4. Publish the result if good

Parameter kappa = 1, 2, 3 is the number of best heads we maintain
Miners don't mine if they already have kappa local candidates for slot i


## Timeminer

1. Init
2. Every time a block shows up try to mine on top of it
3. Run the VDF on the block's PoS until finalized
4. If you have kappa threads or finalized blocks already: replace running if PoS is good.

Miners don't mine if they already have kappa local candidates for slot i


## Chain growth

Every time a space miner makes a proof, he gets a quality which tells him how long it takes to finalize that block

Assumption: All proof of time miners are roughly equally fast

No Slowdown Lemma:
An adversary with unbounded space and parallelism (but cannot break the signature scheme) cannot slow down the growth process.
