CHIP Number   | 0027
:-------------|:----
Title         | Signer Protocol Wallet APIs
Description   | The maximum set of APIs for the wallet signer protocol
Author    	  | [Matt Hauff](https://github.com/Quexington)
Editor    	  | [Dan Perry](https://github.com/danieljperry)
Comments-URI  | [CHIPs repo, PR #102](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/pull/102)
Status     	  | Draft
Category   	  | Process
Sub-Category  | Tooling
Created     	| 2024-03-14
Requires   	  | None
Replaces      | None
Superseded-By | None

## Abstract

This CHIP provides the maximum set of APIs that can be used with the wallet signer protocol.

## Motivation

In order to use the wallet signer protocol, a standard set of APIs is needed. These APIs will be presented in human-readable JSON. Any wallet that wishes to implement the wallet signer protocol will need to serialize the APIs from this CHIP, for example by using the standard from [CHIP-0029](https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/pull/104).

## Backwards Compatibility

This CHIP does not introduce any backwards incompatibilities. The APIs from this CHIP were created for the new wallet signer protocol. They do not modify any existing APIs. In addition, no code forks are necessary for this CHIP's implementation.

## Rationale

The specific APIs from this CHIP were created to be as simple as possible, while enabling the required functionality for communication with the wallet signer protocol.

## Specification

The specification for this CHIP consists of two parts:

1. The types used in the APIs
2. The APIs themselves

### Types

For brevity in the API descriptions, we will first define the following types:

#### `coin`

```json
{
  "parent_coin_id": ...
  "puzzle_hash": ...
  "amount": ...
}
```

---

#### `spend`

```json
{
  "coin": <coin>
  "puzzle": ...
  "solution": ...
}
```

---

#### `transaction_info`

```json
{
  "spends": [<spend>]
}
```

---

#### `signing_target`

```json
{
  "pubkey": ...
  "message": ...
  "hook": ...
}
```

---

#### `sum_hint`

```json
{
  "fingerprints": [...]
  "synthetic_offset": ...
  "final_pubkey": ...
}
```
* Note 1: `synthetic_offset` is an optional parameter
* Note 2: `final_pubkey` indicates the resulting pubkey of the sum of the others

---

#### `path_hint`

```json
{
  "root_fingerprint": ...
  "path": [...]
}
```

---

#### `key_hints`

```json
{
  "sum_hints": [<sum_hint>]
  "path_hints": [<path_hint>]
}
```

---

#### `signing_instructions`

```json
{
  "key_hints": <key_hints>
  "targets": [<signing_target>]
}
```

---

#### `unsigned_transaction`

```json
{
  "transaction_info": <transaction_info>
  "signing_instructions": <signing_instructions>
}
```

---

#### `signing_response`

```json
{
  "signature": <signature>
  "hook": ...
}
```

---

#### `signature`

```json
{
  "signature_type": <signature_type>
  "signature": <signature>
}
```

Where valid options for `<signature_type>` include:
* `bls_12381_aug_scheme`

---

#### `signed_transaction`

```json
{
  "transaction_info": <transaction_info>
  "signatures": [<signature>]
}
```

---

### APIs

This section contains a list of optional RPC APIs to be used with the wallet signer protocol.

#### Note on serialization

Each specific implementation will have the option for how to handle the serialization of the keys in this section.

For example, the return values for wallet RPC APIs typically are in JSON format, so the client code may send something like:

`response["unsigned_transactions"]`

This will send a list of BLOBs that are serialized according to the specified translation/serialization CHIPS, but the whole response will not be serialized in this way.

---

#### `create_transactions`

Note: In current practice this will come from many RPCs, though this may not necessarily always be true.

**ARGUMENTS**
```
Defined on a case-by-case basis.
```

**RETURNS**
```json
{
  "unsigned_transactions": [<unsigned_transaction>]
}
```

---

#### `gather_signing_info`

**ARGUMENTS**
```json
{
  "spends": [<spend>]
}
```

**RETURNS**
```json
{
  "signing_instructions": <signing_instructions>
}
```

---

#### `apply_signatures`

**ARGUMENTS**
```json
{
  "spends": [<spend>]
  "signing_responses": [<signing_response>]
}
```

**RETURNS**
```json
{
  "signed_transactions": [<signed_transaction>]
}
```

---

#### `submit_transactions`

**ARGUMENTS**
```json
{
  "signed_transactions": [<signed_transaction>]
}
```

**RETURNS**
```json
{
  "mempool_ids": [...],
}
```

## Test Cases

[todo]

## Reference Implementation

[todo]

## Security

CNI plans to conduct an internal audit of this code when it is ready.

## Additional Assets

None

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
