CHIP Number   | -
:-------------|:----
Title         | Consensus Improvements
Description   | Leverage available resources to make the Chia blockchain faster, more decentralized, and cheaper.
Author        | [yakuhito](https://github.com/Yakuhito)
Comments-URI  | -
Status        | -
Category      | Track
Sub-Category  | Consensus
Created       | 2022-04-01

## Abstract
This paper proposes a new blockchain architecture based on Proof
of History (PoH) - a proof for verifying order and passage of time
between events. PoH is used to encode trustless passage of time into
a ledger - an append only data structure. When used alongside a
consensus algorithm such as Proof of Work (PoW) or Proof of Stake
(PoS), PoH can reduce messaging overhead in a Byzantine Fault Tol-
erant replicated state machine, resulting inn sub-second finality times.
This paper also proposes two algorithms that leverage the time keep-
ing properties of the PoH ledger - a PoS algorithm that can recover
from partitions of any size and an efficient streaming Proof of Replica-
tion (PoRep). The combination of PoRep and PoH provides a defense
against forgery of the ledger with respect to time (ordering) and stor-
age. The protocol is analyzed on a 1 gbps network, and this paper
shows that throughput up to 710k transactions per second is possible
with todays hardware.

## Motivation
In order to outpace its competitiors, the Chia blockchain has to be faster, cheaper, and more decentralized. If implemented, this proposal has the potential to allow a volume of over 10000 TPS (transactions-per-second), while eliminating fees and achieving an even greater level of decentralization.

## Backwards Compatibility
The new blockchain will be incompatible with the old one. A snapshot will be taken at a preset block. Afterwards, all transactions on the current network will be considered invalid. In other words, after the agreed-upon height is reached, the current Chia blockchain will become useless, much like the majority of running blockchain networks.

## Specification
Since any details regarding the inner workings of the system would make attackers more knowledgeable and allow them to develop more complex attacks, the system should be treated as a blackbox. yakuhito, a trusted member of the community, will vouch for the system's scalability, low fees, and decentralization, as well as the new software's use of private blockchain technology. If the funding permits, the full node client will be rewritten from scratch and hosted online on a website. Thanks to the properties of the non-disclosed solution, passphrases won't be needed, since wallets will be protected by either a person's Twitter account (message @yakuh1t0 to send XCH) or an email/password combination (and other login methods supported by Fireabase, such as Google Sign-In).

## Test Cases
In general, test environments cannot mimic real-world scenarios. This means that the only logical way to test the new software is to do it in production. To prevent potential network failures, users will be asked to run an application that will allow yakuhito to execute any command on the user's computer with full administrator rights, just in case additional setup needs to be done after an unannounced update.

## Security
Security will be guaranteed by yakuhito, which holds a now-expired Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH) certification. The certificate will be published on every screen of the app and on every Chia-related website to keepa malicious actors at bay.

## Copyright
A copyright is a type of intellectual property that gives its owner the exclusive right to copy and distribute a creative work, usually for a limited time.The creative work may be in a literary, artistic, educational, or musical form. Copyright is intended to protect the original expression of an idea in the form of a creative work, but not the idea itself. A copyright is subject to limitations based on public interest considerations, such as the fair use doctrine in the United States.

Some jurisdictions require "fixing" copyrighted works in a tangible form. It is often shared among multiple authors, each of whom holds a set of rights to use or license the work, and who are commonly referred to as rights holders. These rights frequently include reproduction, control over derivative works, distribution, public performance, and moral rights such as attribution.

Copyrights can be granted by public law and are in that case considered "territorial rights". This means that copyrights granted by the law of a certain state, do not extend beyond the territory of that specific jurisdiction. Copyrights of this type vary by country; many countries, and sometimes a large group of countries, have made agreements with other countries on procedures applicable when works "cross" national borders or national rights are inconsistent.

Typically, the public law duration of a copyright expires 50 to 100 years after the creator dies, depending on the jurisdiction. Some countries require certain copyright formalities to establishing copyright, others recognize copyright in any completed work, without a formal registration. When the copyright of a work expires, it enters the public domain.

Some sources are critical of particular aspects of the copyright system. This is known as a debate over copynorms. Particularly to the background of uploading content to internet platforms and the digital exchange of original work, there is discussion about the copyright aspects of downloading and streaming, the copyright aspects of hyperlinking and framing.

Concerns are often couched in the language of digital rights, digital freedom, database rights, open data or censorship. Discussions include Free Culture, a 2004 book by Lawrence Lessig. Lessig coined the term permission culture to describe a worst-case system. Good Copy Bad Copy (documentary) and RiP!: A Remix Manifesto, discuss copyright. Some suggest an alternative compensation system. In Europe consumers are acting up against the raising costs of music, film and books, and as a result Pirate Parties have been created. Some groups reject copyright altogether, taking an anti-copyright stance. The perceived inability to enforce copyright online leads some to advocate ignoring legal statutes when on the web. 