CHIPs/chip-0008.md, before:

| CHIP Number  | < Creator must leave this blank. Editor will assign a number.>                                         |
| :----------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Title        | Split Royalties for NFT1                                                                               |
| Description  | A standard for splitting royalties for NFT1-compliant NFTs on Chia's blockchain                        |
| Author       | [Andreas Greimel](https://github.com/greimela) ([@acevail\_](https://twitter.com/acevail_) on Twitter) |
| Editor       | [Dan Perry](https://github.com/danieljperry)
| Comments-URI | https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/pull/30                                                          |
| Status       | Draft                                                                                                  |
| Category     | Process                                                                                                |
| Sub-Category | Procedural                                                                                             |
| Created      | 2022-09-03                                                                                             |
| Dependencies | None                                                                                                   |

## Abstract

This proposal aims to define a standard for splitting royalties for NFT1-compliant NFTs, using a standard Chialisp puzzle to prevent marketplace lock-in.

## Motivation

One of the great features of NFT1 is the built-in payment of royalties.
It is very flexible, since any address and therefore any puzzle can be used as royalty recipient.
Many people in the community have requested the option to split the royalty payment between different recipients.
For example, a share should be sent to a charity, or multiple artists want to share the royalties automatically.
Having this features available increases the value of the Chia NFT ecosystem as a whole.

Due to the nature of the Coinset model, the royalty split has to be triggered by some off-chain entity. This proposal ensures to ensure independence from any individual actor.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal does not have any backwards incompatibilities.

## Rationale

There have already been approaches to split royalties in the Chia ecosystem. The shortcoming of the existing approaches is a dependence on a single actor to trigger the royalty split.

The solution outlined in this propsal ensures independence from any single actor. This means that any observer of the Chia blockchain is able to trigger the royalty split, including the users wallet or an NFT marketplace.

The core is a simple Chialisp puzzle without many moving parts. It includes a payout scheme defining how the royalty should be split. The payment scheme is fixed and can not be altered by third parties. Anyone is able to trigger the royalty payout for any NFT.

In order to allow obervers to spend a royalty split coin, this proposal contains an extension to the NFT on-chain metadata to include the royalty payout scheme. This allows observers to recreate the royalty puzzle and optionally spend it.

An alternative approach would be to include the royalty payout scheme in the off-chain metadata instead. This was dismissed since it would require an observer to fetch the off-chain metadata as well to be able to trigger the split, which increases the complexity and reduces the permanence. Relying solely on on-chain metadata ensures the royalty split can always be reconstructed.

## Specification

This specification has two parts.
The Chialisp puzzle that splits itself into one or multiple smaller coins, according to a predefined payout scheme.
And an addition to the NFT metadata, to allow obervers to figure out the royalty puzzle and optionally spend it.

An example payout scheme could look like this

| Recipient Address                                              | Share      |
| :------------------------------------------------------------- | :--------- |
| xch18qt2ju2sj3k8w3290az6flkkc95fqcmcg7edl90ns0jrjav8xttsfmtqfp | 80         |
| xch1p9e3l3ttl7qrrhy6zmmqmjm0v33fvrxhd494yv7at0ppd97hljns4uw464 | 20         |

### Royalty Split Chialisp Puzzle

The proposed Chialisp puzzle looks like this.

```
(mod (PAYOUT_SCHEME my_amount)

  (include condition_codes.clvm)
  (include curry-and-treehash.clinc)

  (defun-inline calculate_share (total_amount share total_shares)
    (f (divmod (* total_amount share) total_shares))
  )

  (defun-inline get_amount (payout_scheme_item total_amount total_shares)
    (calculate_share total_amount (f (r payout_scheme_item)) total_shares)
  )

  (defun-inline get_puzhash (payout_scheme_item)
    (f payout_scheme_item)
  )

   ; Loop through the royalty payout scheme and create coins
  (defun split_amount_and_create_coins (PAYOUT_SCHEME total_amount total_shares)
    (if PAYOUT_SCHEME
      (c
        (list
          CREATE_COIN
          (get_puzhash (f PAYOUT_SCHEME))
          (get_amount (f PAYOUT_SCHEME) total_amount total_shares)
        )
        (split_amount_and_create_coins (r PAYOUT_SCHEME) total_amount total_shares)
      )
      ()
    )
  )

  (defun count_shares (PAYOUT_SCHEME)
    (if PAYOUT_SCHEME
      (+
        (f (r (f PAYOUT_SCHEME)))
        (count_shares (r PAYOUT_SCHEME))
      )
      0
    )
  )

  ; main
  (c
    (list CREATE_COIN_ANNOUNCEMENT my_amount)
    (c
      (list ASSERT_MY_AMOUNT my_amount)
      (split_amount_and_create_coins PAYOUT_SCHEME my_amount (count_shares PAYOUT_SCHEME))
    )
  )
)
```

The royalty payout scheme `PAYOUT_SCHEME` is curried into this puzzle, to make it immutable. 
Using the above scheme as an example, it looks like this:
```
((0x3816a97150946c7745457f45a4fed6c16890637847b2df95f383e439758732d7 80) (0x09731fc56bff8031dc9a16f60dcb6f6462960cd76d4b5233dd5bc21697d7fca7 20)
```

The only solution parameter needed on spend is the actual amount of the coin.

On spend, the puzzle steps through the entries of the `PAYOUT_SCHEME` and creates a new coin per entry. The amount of the new coins will be a share of the total amount, determined by the share defined in the `PAYOUT_SCHEME`. The total number of shares is defined as the  sum of all individual shares in the scheme and will be calculated by the puzzle.

This means the share distributions `(1,1)` and `(50,50)` and `(5000, 5000)` are equivalent.

If the created coins do not use up the full coin amount, the rest is left for the farmer of the block. This difference is most likely very small and not worth the effort to construct a more complex puzzle to collect this rest.

### NFT Metadata

The second part is an addition to the NFT metadata.
In order to allow any observer to recreate the split royalty puzzle and trigger the split, the observer has to know the payout scheme.

The suggested format is a list of 2-tuples, each containing an address and the share of the royalties it should receive. The total number of shares is the sum of all individual shares in the list.

```typescript
{
  // existing metadata
  "rs": Array<[string, number]>
}
```

The royalty payout example from above would look like this:

```typescript
{
  //existing metadata
  "rs": [
    ["xch18qt2ju2sj3k8w3290az6flkkc95fqcmcg7edl90ns0jrjav8xttsfmtqfp", 80],
    ["xch1p9e3l3ttl7qrrhy6zmmqmjm0v33fvrxhd494yv7at0ppd97hljns4uw464", 20]
  ]
}
```

## Test Cases

The unit test for the royalty split Chialisp puzzle is located in the `royalty_split` branch of the `greimela/chia-blockchain` GitHub repository: [tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_puzzles.py](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_puzzles.py).

A more extensive integration test using NFT offers can be found here: [tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_royalty_split.clvm](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_royalty_split.py).

## Reference Implementation

The Chialisp puzzle itself is located in the `royalty_split` branch of the `greimela/chia-blockchain` GitHub repository: [chia/wallet/puzzles/royalty_split.clvm](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/chia/wallet/puzzles/royalty_split.clvm).

## Security

The Chialisp code has been covered by unit tests, but has not been audited yet by Chia Network or the broader community.

Potential risks:

- Royalty recipient can be altered
  - The royalty recipients are curried into the puzzle and the only parameter in the solution is the amount. So the payout scheme can not be altered after it has been created.
- Royalty payout can be stalled
  - Since the royalty payment can be triggered by any party on a permissionless blockchain, nobody can stall or prevent this. 
- Info to construct royalty puzzle can get lost
  - The payout scheme is added to the NFT on-chain metadata, so it can not get lost as long as the Chia blockchain lives.
- Users can be deceived by a mismatch between the NFT metadata and the actual royalty puzzle
  - A malicious actor could specifiy in the NFT metadata that a large share of the royalties is given to some charity. The actor could then use a different royalty puzzle that sends all royalties to himself.
  - Mitigation: Marketplaces and blockchain explorers should check whether the payout scheme defined in the NFT metadata matches the royalty puzzle.

## Additional Assets

No additional assets.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

Commit message:

Add comment to count_shares

CHIPs/chip-0008.md, after:

| CHIP Number  | < Creator must leave this blank. Editor will assign a number.>                                         |
| :----------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Title        | Split Royalties for NFT1                                                                               |
| Description  | A standard for splitting royalties for NFT1-compliant NFTs on Chia's blockchain                        |
| Author       | [Andreas Greimel](https://github.com/greimela) ([@acevail\_](https://twitter.com/acevail_) on Twitter) |
| Editor       | [Dan Perry](https://github.com/danieljperry)
| Comments-URI | https://github.com/Chia-Network/chips/pull/30                                                          |
| Status       | Draft                                                                                                  |
| Category     | Process                                                                                                |
| Sub-Category | Procedural                                                                                             |
| Created      | 2022-09-03                                                                                             |
| Dependencies | None                                                                                                   |

## Abstract

This proposal aims to define a standard for splitting royalties for NFT1-compliant NFTs, using a standard Chialisp puzzle to prevent marketplace lock-in.

## Motivation

One of the great features of NFT1 is the built-in payment of royalties.
It is very flexible, since any address and therefore any puzzle can be used as royalty recipient.
Many people in the community have requested the option to split the royalty payment between different recipients.
For example, a share should be sent to a charity, or multiple artists want to share the royalties automatically.
Having this features available increases the value of the Chia NFT ecosystem as a whole.

Due to the nature of the Coinset model, the royalty split has to be triggered by some off-chain entity. This proposal ensures to ensure independence from any individual actor.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal does not have any backwards incompatibilities.

## Rationale

There have already been approaches to split royalties in the Chia ecosystem. The shortcoming of the existing approaches is a dependence on a single actor to trigger the royalty split.

The solution outlined in this propsal ensures independence from any single actor. This means that any observer of the Chia blockchain is able to trigger the royalty split, including the users wallet or an NFT marketplace.

The core is a simple Chialisp puzzle without many moving parts. It includes a payout scheme defining how the royalty should be split. The payment scheme is fixed and can not be altered by third parties. Anyone is able to trigger the royalty payout for any NFT.

In order to allow obervers to spend a royalty split coin, this proposal contains an extension to the NFT on-chain metadata to include the royalty payout scheme. This allows observers to recreate the royalty puzzle and optionally spend it.

An alternative approach would be to include the royalty payout scheme in the off-chain metadata instead. This was dismissed since it would require an observer to fetch the off-chain metadata as well to be able to trigger the split, which increases the complexity and reduces the permanence. Relying solely on on-chain metadata ensures the royalty split can always be reconstructed.

## Specification

This specification has two parts.
The Chialisp puzzle that splits itself into one or multiple smaller coins, according to a predefined payout scheme.
And an addition to the NFT metadata, to allow obervers to figure out the royalty puzzle and optionally spend it.

An example payout scheme could look like this

| Recipient Address                                              | Share      |
| :------------------------------------------------------------- | :--------- |
| xch18qt2ju2sj3k8w3290az6flkkc95fqcmcg7edl90ns0jrjav8xttsfmtqfp | 80         |
| xch1p9e3l3ttl7qrrhy6zmmqmjm0v33fvrxhd494yv7at0ppd97hljns4uw464 | 20         |

### Royalty Split Chialisp Puzzle

The proposed Chialisp puzzle looks like this.

```
(mod (PAYOUT_SCHEME my_amount)

  (include condition_codes.clvm)
  (include curry-and-treehash.clinc)

  (defun-inline calculate_share (total_amount share total_shares)
    (f (divmod (* total_amount share) total_shares))
  )

  (defun-inline get_amount (payout_scheme_item total_amount total_shares)
    (calculate_share total_amount (f (r payout_scheme_item)) total_shares)
  )

  (defun-inline get_puzhash (payout_scheme_item)
    (f payout_scheme_item)
  )

   ; Loop through the royalty payout scheme and create coins
  (defun split_amount_and_create_coins (PAYOUT_SCHEME total_amount total_shares)
    (if PAYOUT_SCHEME
      (c
        (list
          CREATE_COIN
          (get_puzhash (f PAYOUT_SCHEME))
          (get_amount (f PAYOUT_SCHEME) total_amount total_shares)
        )
        (split_amount_and_create_coins (r PAYOUT_SCHEME) total_amount total_shares)
      )
      ()
    )
  )

  ; calculate the sum of all shares to later determine the share of each participant
  (defun count_shares (PAYOUT_SCHEME)
    (if PAYOUT_SCHEME
      (+
        (f (r (f PAYOUT_SCHEME)))
        (count_shares (r PAYOUT_SCHEME))
      )
      0
    )
  )

  ; main
  (c
    (list CREATE_COIN_ANNOUNCEMENT my_amount)
    (c
      (list ASSERT_MY_AMOUNT my_amount)
      (split_amount_and_create_coins PAYOUT_SCHEME my_amount (count_shares PAYOUT_SCHEME))
    )
  )
)
```

The royalty payout scheme `PAYOUT_SCHEME` is curried into this puzzle, to make it immutable. 
Using the above scheme as an example, it looks like this:
```
((0x3816a97150946c7745457f45a4fed6c16890637847b2df95f383e439758732d7 80) (0x09731fc56bff8031dc9a16f60dcb6f6462960cd76d4b5233dd5bc21697d7fca7 20)
```

The only solution parameter needed on spend is the actual amount of the coin.

On spend, the puzzle steps through the entries of the `PAYOUT_SCHEME` and creates a new coin per entry. The amount of the new coins will be a share of the total amount, determined by the share defined in the `PAYOUT_SCHEME`. The total number of shares is defined as the  sum of all individual shares in the scheme and will be calculated by the puzzle.

This means the share distributions `(1,1)` and `(50,50)` and `(5000, 5000)` are equivalent.

If the created coins do not use up the full coin amount, the rest is left for the farmer of the block. This difference is most likely very small and not worth the effort to construct a more complex puzzle to collect this rest.

### NFT Metadata

The second part is an addition to the NFT metadata.
In order to allow any observer to recreate the split royalty puzzle and trigger the split, the observer has to know the payout scheme.

The suggested format is a list of 2-tuples, each containing an address and the share of the royalties it should receive. The total number of shares is the sum of all individual shares in the list.

```typescript
{
  // existing metadata
  "rs": Array<[string, number]>
}
```

The royalty payout example from above would look like this:

```typescript
{
  //existing metadata
  "rs": [
    ["xch18qt2ju2sj3k8w3290az6flkkc95fqcmcg7edl90ns0jrjav8xttsfmtqfp", 80],
    ["xch1p9e3l3ttl7qrrhy6zmmqmjm0v33fvrxhd494yv7at0ppd97hljns4uw464", 20]
  ]
}
```

## Test Cases

The unit test for the royalty split Chialisp puzzle is located in the `royalty_split` branch of the `greimela/chia-blockchain` GitHub repository: [tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_puzzles.py](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_puzzles.py).

A more extensive integration test using NFT offers can be found here: [tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_royalty_split.clvm](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/tests/wallet/nft_wallet/test_nft_royalty_split.py).

## Reference Implementation

The Chialisp puzzle itself is located in the `royalty_split` branch of the `greimela/chia-blockchain` GitHub repository: [chia/wallet/puzzles/royalty_split.clvm](https://github.com/greimela/chia-blockchain/blob/royalty_split/chia/wallet/puzzles/royalty_split.clvm).

## Security

The Chialisp code has been covered by unit tests, but has not been audited yet by Chia Network or the broader community.

Potential risks:

- Royalty recipient can be altered
  - The royalty recipients are curried into the puzzle and the only parameter in the solution is the amount. So the payout scheme can not be altered after it has been created.
- Royalty payout can be stalled
  - Since the royalty payment can be triggered by any party on a permissionless blockchain, nobody can stall or prevent this. 
- Info to construct royalty puzzle can get lost
  - The payout scheme is added to the NFT on-chain metadata, so it can not get lost as long as the Chia blockchain lives.
- Users can be deceived by a mismatch between the NFT metadata and the actual royalty puzzle
  - A malicious actor could specifiy in the NFT metadata that a large share of the royalties is given to some charity. The actor could then use a different royalty puzzle that sends all royalties to himself.
  - Mitigation: Marketplaces and blockchain explorers should check whether the payout scheme defined in the NFT metadata matches the royalty puzzle.

## Additional Assets

No additional assets.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
